---
layout: post
title: The work of the most influencial woman in the history of mathematics
description: Noether's theorems.
author: Guilherme Sadovski
date: 2025-01-02 19:31 -0300 UTC
tags: phys-math
categories: physics, math
pseudocode: false
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
toc:
  sidebar: left
thumbnail: assets/img/kerr.webp
---

## Introduction

Amalie Emmy Noether is widely recognized as the most influential woman in the history of mathematics. Among her brilliant work, two theorems formulated in 1915 are known by every theoretical physicist. Noether's theorems impacted every branch of physics that involves the continuous evolution of a dynamical system.

In mathematics, they constitute an important result in functional analysis, and have foundational role in algebraic topology, particularly the idea that algebraic structures can capture invariant properties of a space.

The theorems give a rigorous connection between the continuous symmetries of a dynamical system and its conservation laws. In classical and quantum field theory, they clarify how the presence of symmetries can constrain the dynamics, define charges, and even determine the physical states of a model.

The theorems work in both directions. Therefore, the presence of constrained dynamics and conserved charges also implies the existence of underlying symmetries. As one can imagine, this is an extremely powerful result, especially considering the fact that most of science involves predictions of how something was, will be, and what remains unchanged in the process.

## Prelude in classical field theory
To begin, let's consider $X$ a $n$-dimensional spacetime, and $\phi \left(x\right) \; ; \; x \in X$ a tensorial field over it with dynamics defined by the action functional

$$ S \left[ \phi \right] \equiv \int_{X} \mathcal{L} \left( \phi, d \phi \right)  \;, $$

where $d$ is the exterior derivative, and $\mathcal{L} \left( \phi, d \phi \right)$ is the $n$-form Lagrangian.

Under an infinitesimal field variation, $\phi \mapsto \phi' = \phi + \delta \phi$, which vanishes at the boundary $\partial X$ of $X$, the action functional will vary accordingly,

$$ \delta S \left[\phi\right] = \int_{X} {\delta}^{(1)}_{\phi} \mathcal{L} \delta\phi \;, $$

where $ {\delta}^{(1)}_{\phi} \equiv \frac{\partial }{\partial \phi} - d \left[ \frac{\partial }{\partial \left(d \phi\right)}\right] $ is the Euler-Lagrange operator.

Hamilton's principle ($\delta S = 0$) implies the Euler-Lagrange field equations

$$ \delta^{(1)}_{\phi} \mathcal{L} = 0 \;, $$

whose solutions are the extrema of $S$, and comprises the so-called "on-shell" configurations of the field $\phi$. These are the so-called classical solutions of the field $\phi$.

## What are symmetries?

Now, consider a $\alpha$-parameter family of infinitesimal variations, $ \phi \mapsto \phi' = \phi + \delta_{\xi ^{a}}\phi $ with $a \in \left\\{1, \cdots, \alpha\right\\} $, that do not necessarily vanish at $\partial_X$. This family of field transformations is said to be continuous, $C^k$-differentiable, smooth, *etc.*, if the fields $\xi^{a} = \xi^a (x) \;$ are. If $\xi^a (x)$ are constants, the transformations are said to be global, otherwise they are local.  

We will assume that $\delta_{\xi^{a}}\phi$ satisfy the axioms of an algebra. This algebra will be finite-dimensional if the transformations are global, or infinite-dimensional if the transformations are local. Very important examples in high-energy physics are the BRST and the Lie algebras. Among these, only finite-dimensional Lie algebras are necessarily associated with the local properties of Lie groups. In fact, symmetries in physics are more often associated to algebras than to groups.

We say that $\xi^a$ are the elements of a quasi-symmetry algebra of a classical field theory if 

$$ \delta_{\xi^{a}} S = \int_{\partial X} K_{\xi^{a}} \;, $$

where $K_{\xi^{a}}$ is a $(n-1)$-form depending arbitrarily on $\phi$ and $d \phi$. Clearly, quasi-symmetries are on-shell symmetries of a field theory since boundary terms do not contribute to the Euler-Lagrange field equations.

## Noether's 1st theorem

The quasi-symmetry conditions above, when developed for the case of global transformations, lead to the so-called Noether's identities,

$$ \delta_{\phi}^{(1)} \mathcal{L} \delta_{\xi^{a}} \phi + d J_{\xi^{a}} = 0 \;, \tag{1}\label{eq:noethersidentities} $$

where 

$$ J_{\xi^{a}} \equiv \left[\frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial \left(d \phi\right)}\right] \delta_{\xi^{a}} \phi - K_{\xi^{a}} $$

are the so-called Noether's currents. These identities exemplify how the presence of (quasi-)symmetry generators, $\delta_{\xi^{a}} \phi$, constrain the Euler-Lagrange term, $\delta_{\phi}^{(1)}\mathcal{L}$, and *vice-versa*.

Noether's 1st theorem is a particular case of the Noether's identity, restricted to on-shell field configurations. Explicitly, \eqref{eq:noethersidentities} reduces on-shell to a continuity equation, $d J_{\xi^{a}} = 0$. In other words, the presence of $\alpha$ global quasi-symmetry generators, $\delta_{\xi^{a}} \phi$, implies $\alpha$ on-shell conserved Noether's currents, $J_{\xi^{a}}$, and *vice-versa*. This is rigorously how symmetry algebra elements are connected to dynamical invariants.

Finally, for each $J_{\xi^{a}}$ we have a so-called conserved Noether's charge, 

$$ Q_{\xi^{a}} \equiv \int_{Y} J_{\xi^{a}} \;,$$

inside a spacelike $(n-1)$-submanifold $Y$ in $X$, and *vice-versa*.

## The BRST symmetry and charge

As mentioned, the BRST symmetry algebra is an important example present in gauge theories. Consider the Yang-Mills (YM) dynamics,

$$ S_{YM}[A] \equiv - \int_{X} \tr \left( F \star F \right) \;,  $$

where $- \tr$ is the Killing form on the Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$, $F=dA+A^2$ is the $\mathfrak{g}$-valued 2-form curvature (field strength) of the $\mathfrak{g}$-valued 1-form connection $A$ (gauge field); and, $\star$ is the Hodge operator on $X$.

The BRST algebra is a global symmetry of YM. Explicitly, $\delta_{BRST} S_{YM} = 0$ where $\delta_{BRST} A = -Dc$ and $\delta_{BRST} c = -c^2$; $D = d + \left[A, \phantom{A}\right] $ is the exterior covariant derivative in the adjoint representation; and $c$ is the $\mathfrak{g}$-valued 0-form Faddeev-Popov ghost field --- introduced to make ${\delta_{BRST}}^2 = 0$.

Via Noether's 1st theorem, the BRST symmetry above then implies that the YM dynamics is off-shell constrained by \eqref{eq:noethersidentities}, and that there will be a on-shell conserved Noether's current and charge, namely, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
J_{BRST} &= \tr \left( \star FDc \right) \;, \\
Q_{BRST} &= \int_{Y} \tr \left( \star FDc\right) \;.
\end{aligned}
$$

In the absence of a gauge anomaly, the BRST symmetry survives the quantization process[^1]. Noether's identities resurrect as the so-called Slavnov-Taylor identities constraining the quantum correlation functions, and guaranteeing that quantum YM theory is unitary and renormalizable to all orders in perturbation theory. Additionally, the Noether's charge $Q_{BRST}$ transforms into a nilpotent operator ${\hat{Q}_{BRST}}^2 = 0$, acting over the YM Fock space, $\mathcal{F}$. If not enough, its cohomology 

$$ H \left(\hat{Q}_{BRST}\right) \equiv \left\{ \hat{Q}_{BRST} \lvert \text{phys} \rangle = 0 \; ; \; \lvert \text{phys} \rangle \neq \hat{Q}_{BRST}\lvert \text{something} \rangle \right\} $$

isomorphically defines the subspace $ \mathcal{F}_{\text{phys}} \subset \mathcal{F} $ of physical states of the YM field.

[^1]: The BRST quantization process involves adding to the YM action a gauge-fixing term, and possibly non-linearity terms, which inevitably change the explicit form of $J_{BRST}$ and $Q_{BRST}$. Therefore, the form given here is not really the one used in a perturbative quantum field theory context as they are plagued with gauge redundancies. Still, they are mathematically and physically correct from a classical standpoint.

## u(1) symmetry and conservation of electric charge

Noether's 1st theorem allow us to associate the existence of a global $\mathfrak{u}(1)$ symmetry algebra to the conservation law of electric charge in Dirac's theory for spin half fermions (electrons, quarks, *etc.*).

The dynamics of Dirac's theory is defined by

$$ S_{\text{Dirac}} \left[\psi, \bar{\psi} \right] \equiv \int_{X} \left[ \bar{\psi} \left( i \slashed{\nabla} - m \right) \psi \right] \eta \;,  $$

where $\hbar=1$ (natural units); $\psi$ is the 0-form Dirac spinor, and $\bar{\psi} \equiv {\psi}^{\dagger} \gamma^{0}$ its adjoint; $\slashed{\nabla} \equiv \gamma \rfloor \nabla \; ; \; \nabla = d + \Gamma$ is the exterior covariant derivative of the Levi-Civita connection $\Gamma$, in the spinorial representation, and in the Feynman slashed notation making use of the 1-vector $\gamma \equiv \gamma^{\mu} \partial_{\mu}$ of gamma matrices $\gamma^\mu$; $m$ is a mass parameter, and $\eta \equiv \star \mathbb{1}$ is the unitary $n$-form volume in $X$.

The generator $\delta_{\xi} \psi = -i \xi \psi$, $\delta_{\xi} \bar{\psi} = i \xi \bar{\psi}$, satisfies the $\mathfrak{u}(1)$ Lie algebra. Due to the global symmetry $\delta_{\xi} S_{\text{Dirac}} = 0$, Noether's 1st theorem implies the existence of a conserved Noether current and charge. Respectively, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
J_{\xi} &= \xi \bar{\psi} \slashed{\eta} \psi \;, \\
Q_{\xi} &= \xi \int_{Y} \bar{\psi} \slashed{\eta} \psi \;,
\end{aligned}
$$

where $\slashed{\eta } \equiv \gamma \rfloor \eta$. In particular, $Q_{\text{electric}} \equiv Q_{\xi}/\xi$ is the actual physical observable that we call the electric charge of $\psi$.

## Translations and conservation of energy-momentum

Global translations are a 1-parameter family of automorphism maps on $X$ that is generated by the presence of a globally well-defined, smooth, and constant, vector field $\xi = \xi^{\mu} \partial_{\mu}$. This field exists if, and only if, $X$ is globally flat ($\nabla = d$ everywhere).

Translations non-trivially transform the spacetime $X$ itself, which is quite different from the BRST or the $\mathfrak{u}(1)$, which non-trivially transform only certain fields. In particular, every natural tensor field over $X$ inevitably transform under translations. This is a functorial property that all natural bundles obey.

The algebra of translations has generator $\delta_{\xi}\phi = L_{\xi} \phi$, where $L_{\xi} \equiv \xi\rfloor d + d\xi\rfloor$ is the Lie derivative along $\xi$, and $\rfloor$ is the interior product. It is easy to show that

$$ \delta_{\xi} S \left[\phi\right] = \int_{X} d \left(\xi \rfloor \mathcal{L}\right) $$

holds for any $S \left[\phi\right]$. This goes to show that, as long as $\xi$ exists on $X$, then translations will be a quasi-symmetry of any field theories over it. Noether's 1st theorem then kicks in to imply a conserved current and charge,

$$ J_{\xi} = \left[ \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial \left(d \phi\right)} \right] L_{\xi} \phi - \xi \rfloor \mathcal{L} \;, \tag{2}\label{eq:energy-momentum} $$ 

$$ Q_{\xi} = \int_{Y} \left\{ \left[ \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial \left(d \phi\right)} \right] L_{\xi} \phi - \xi \rfloor \mathcal{L} \right\} \;. \tag{3}\label{eq:total-energy} $$ 

The Noether's current \eqref{eq:energy-momentum} is the $(n-1)$-form known as the energy-momentum density of $\phi$. Meanwhile, the corresponding Noether's charge \eqref{eq:total-energy} is our traditional concept of the total energy of $\phi$ inside the $(n-1)$-volume $Y$.

Now, it should be clear that energy is not always conserved. For instance, in the presence of a gravitational field, $X$ is not flat and $\xi$ is not globally well-defined. Since there is no global algebra of translations, there is also no global translational symmetry of $S \left[\phi\right] $. Noether's 1st theorem is then not applicable, and no translational Noether's charge is well-defined. In fact, this is precisely why gravitational redshift occurs. Simply, the energy of the electromagnetic field is not generally conserved on a curved spacetime. This is why the afterglow of the Big Bang, known as the cosmic microwave background (CMB), is now completely invisible and has an average temperature of only 2.7 Kelvins above the absolute zero (approx. --270.4°C). If energy was conserved, no stars, planets, or life would be possible. It would be too hot even for the atomic nuclei.

## Noether's 2nd theorem
